Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger. This is a series
on the foundations of mathematics, and currently,
we're investigating elementary calculus from the
point of view of polynomials or poly numbers.
This is a novel and much-simplified approach to
the subject. In our last video, we had a look
at linear and quadratic polynomials or poly
numbers and their associated graphs. Today,
we're going to carry on talking especially about
parabolas or quadratic polynomials in more detail.
So, let's summarize what we accomplished in
the last few slides of the last video. We're
talking about a quadratic polynomial; there
it is—P equals just a list of numbers: a, b,
and c, or in standard alpha form, a plus b alpha
plus c alpha squared. Now, we're assuming this
is really a quadratic polynomial, so that this
term here, this c constant, is actually nonzero,
so it really is degree two. We discovered by
expanding the Taylor by poly number that the first
derivative or the first sub-derivative was b plus
2c alpha, and the second sub-derivative was c. We
also determined that the tangent line or the first
tangent to the poly number at the point r is given
by this expression. So, that's a line—a degree
one polynomial—unless this is zero, which is an
approximation to the poly number P at the point r.
r is just some random number, and we're generally
working over the rational numbers here, but a lot
of what we say works for the integers as well.
At this point, we can observe
something reasonably interesting:
the slope of the tangent line to P at r is
exactly the derivative of P evaluated at r. So,
we saw last time that when we had a line like
this, the two constants here had geometrical
significance. This was the y-intercept,
and this was the slope. This quantity here,
b plus 2c r, is exactly what you get when you
take the derivative and evaluate it at r. So,
this gives us a geometrical interpretation of what
the derivative or the first sub-derivative means:
it is the slope of the tangent line to the
poly number or polynomial at the point r. So,
for different points r, there are different
tangent lines, and those tangent lines will
have different slopes, and the slope at
every point r is given by the derivative.
A useful deduction to make from that is this
theorem here: that the tangent line is horizontal
precisely when r has the value minus b over 2c.
Now, that's an immediate consequence of setting
the derivative, which is b plus 2c r, equal to
zero and solving for what r must be. This is a
linear equation, so when we set it equal to
zero, we are guaranteed to have a solution:
it's minus b over 2c. This number is, as we'll
see, very important in terms of the geometry of
the parabola for the quadratic polynomial. And we
can see that another way by doing something that
we've already talked about in a former video in
this series. If you look at Math Foundations 48B,
we talked about completing the square in a
quadratic expression. We're going to do that
now with this quadratic polynomial a + b alpha
+ c alpha squared. I must warn you that our
notation here is different from what it was there.
This is a sort of non-standard notation; we're
indexing our coefficients with a, the constant
term, and c, the coefficient of alpha squared.
Alright, so what we're going to do is
we're going to rewrite this thing here,
first of all by taking out a common
factor c, which we're assuming is nonzero,
writing it as c times (alpha squared + b/c times
alpha + a/c). Then, in this expression here,
we're going to add this term and also subtract
it so that nothing actually has changed. Where
did this term come from? Well, it's exactly half
of this coefficient here, so we're taking half
of this coefficient here and squaring it, and
then also subtracting it as well. The reason
why we're doing that is because now these first
three terms here are actually a perfect square.
This thing here is c times (alpha + b/2c) squared.
The reason is simply that when we square this,
we're gonna get alpha squared, we're gonna
get b/2c squared, and twice the product will
give us b/c times alpha—the thing that's right
there. Of course, there's also the other terms:
when we take them outside the bracket, multiply c
by a/c, we get a, and when we multiply it by minus
b squared over 4c squared, we get minus b squared
over 4c. I'll write that just a little bit more
compactly by taking this constant business over
a common denominator of 4c. So, we get (4ac - b
squared) all over 4c as the constant term there
and c times (alpha + b/2c) all squared there.
Now we make a simple but important
observation that whenever we have a
square, that square is necessarily
positive. When I say positive,
I generally mean greater than or
equal to zero. So, this term here,
if we substitute alpha for r, any number, then
r + b/2c all squared will always be positive.
So, I've repeated that formula that we've just
obtained; we've rewritten the polynomial P in
this fashion here. It's the same polynomial,
it's just been rewritten. And now we're going to
deduce some important things, so we'll put these
together in a theorem: three different statements.
The first is that if c is positive, then P(r) is
bigger than or equal to this number for any r,
with equality happening here precisely
when r happens to be minus b over 2c. So,
this is an inequality. If there was an
equal sign, it would be an equality,
and when we have an inequality like this,
it's telling us this is always bigger than
or equal to this. It's usually interesting to
ask, well, what about the special case? When
exactly are they actually equal? Because that's
included here as a possibility. So, this second
part of the statement is telling us that the
equality occurs precisely when r has this value.
Let's just have a look at that statement first:
that's an immediate consequence of this. Because
if c is positive, then this is positive, and
we've just observed that this quantity here
is always positive, so this is a positive thing.
And so, if we add it to this, we're always going
to get something which is bigger than or equal
to this. That's the statement there. The value
of the poly number, or the polynomial at r, is
always at least this number here. And when do we
actually get equality? Well, we get equality
when this term is actually equal to zero,
and this will be equal to zero precisely
when the value r here satisfies r + b/2c
equals zero—in other words, when r equals minus b
over 2c. That's illustrated by this picture here.
Okay, so here's a picture of such a
quadratic polynomial where c is positive,
so it opens up like this. We say it's a
parabola opening upwards, and here's the
value minus b over 2c. The function's value at
that will be exactly this, because this term
will be zero. So, there's the value (4ac - b
squared)/4c right there. And geometrically,
you can also see that the parabola is opening
up—it's always bigger than or equal to this value,
and it attains this value exactly when x equals
this number here. That's what we're saying. Now,
this number here is exactly the same quantity
that appeared in our previous theorem, which
stated that this tangent line here—the tangent
to the polynomial at this point—is horizontal,
which is a standard kind of important fact in
calculus: that when you have a minimum here,
the minimum is characterized by the tangent
being horizontal. That's what we're seeing here.
So, the second part of the theorem is what happens
when c is strictly negative. If c is less than
zero, then the claim is that P(r) is less than
or equal to this quantity for any r, and again,
equality happens exactly in the same situation
when r equals minus b over 2c. And that's again
a consequence of this formula because if this
term here is now negative—less than zero—and
this is always positive, then the product will
still be negative, and so we're always going to
get here as a total something which is less than
or equal to this because it's this plus something
negative. So, it's always going down, and it
doesn't go down—we have equality precisely when
this is zero. And that's the same condition
as previously, when r is minus b over 2c.
So, the picture that goes with that is this
one here. It's a parabola opening downwards;
there's the critical point minus b over 2c.
At that point right there, the value of the
polynomial is (4ac - b squared)/4c, and for
all other values, it's something less—the
value is less. And again, that's the place where
the tangent is horizontal, the slope is zero.
And there's a third part of the
theorem: that the line x equals
minus b over 2c is an axis of symmetry of
the parabola. So, in this picture here,
what we're talking about is this line here, the
line where x happens to be this critical value,
or over here, this line here. And the
claim is that it's an axis of symmetry,
and that means that if you take any point on
the parabola here and you reflect it an equal
amount on this side over here, you still get
a point on the parabola, and conversely. So,
it's like a mirror—if you put a mirror here, then
the parabola would be reflected on itself. So,
it's completely symmetrical in that line—it's
called an axis of symmetry. And why is that? Well,
it's again because of this expression here: that
if you take any point where you, say, go r to the
coordinates, so if you have some value x here so
that you're adding r to minus b over 2c, then this
quantity here will just be r. On the other hand,
if you go r in the opposite direction, then this
quantity will be minus r, and the reason why the
two values are the same is because r squared and
minus r squared are equal. That's the reason
why the curve is symmetrical about this line.
So, this is a very nice and important formula
in the study of the geometry of a parabola or
that quadratic polynomial. There's another very
interesting and important consequence to this
basic formula that we've established. There's
the polynomial P, and there it's rewritten after
having completed the square. So, the consequence
of this is that we can actually say something
about what the shape of such a graph is. The
point is that the graph of P—or a graph for P,
perhaps we should say because there's no unique
graph—can be obtained from the graph of Q
equals alpha squared, which is the simplest
quadratic polynomial, by doing three things:
by first scaling in the y-direction by some
constant c—actually the same c here that's
here—then translating by b/2c to the left, and
then by translating up by (4ac - b squared)/4c.
So, why is that? Well, suppose we take the
polynomial alpha squared, if we perhaps that's
right there and picture it right there—that's the
standard parabola, usually y equals x squared in
x-y terms. And it goes through the point (1, 1),
it goes through the point (2, 4), of course, it
goes through the point (0, 0)—it's symmetric along
the y-axis. That's your basic parabola. So, if we
take that thing and we scale it by multiplying it
by c, what happens? Well, of course, it depends on
what c is. But let's say c happens to be, say, 2.
Okay, so that means that instead of plotting (1,
1), we would plot (1, 2). Instead of plotting (2,
4), we would plot (2, 8), and so on. So, all the
y-coordinates would be times 2. The parabola
would then look more constrained like this,
but it would be basically a rescaling of this one.
Okay, so that's one step—scaling, multiplying by
c has this effect. On the other hand, if c
happened to be, say, between 0 and 1, then
the effect would be sort of the opposite—it would
be more like going from here to here. The parabola
would become wider, and if c was negative, well,
it would have then again yet a different aspect,
because then you'd be multiplying by minus
1, so the parabola, instead of opening
upwards like this, would be opening downwards like
this—that's the effect of multiplying by minus 1.
So, after that rescaling, then what happens
if we replace alpha with alpha + b/2c? Well,
the effect is that instead of having things
centered here at zero, it's now moved over
to be centered at minus b/2c. So, for example,
if b/2c happened to be positive, then we would
be moving in this direction here. And why is that?
The probably simplest way of seeing that is to ask
yourself what happens if we evaluate this as at
minus b/2c? If we evaluate this at minus b/2c,
then we get zero, then we get just the same thing
as we get if we evaluated this at zero. So, this
thing evaluated there is the same as this thing
evaluated there, so it means that the whole thing
is shifted over so that its vertex is now at this
point. Of course, this point doesn't have to be
here—it could be on the right-hand side, it could
be anywhere along the axis. Okay, it's starting
to look a lot like our formula now. We just have
to do one more thing: we have to add this, but
this is some number that's independent of r, and
the effect of it is simply to take the values and
add this number to them. So, if this number was 5,
for example, then the graph would just be obtained
from taking this and adding 5 to the y-coordinates
of all the points. So, it effectively just moves
it up 5, or if this was minus 3, the effect would
be to subtract 3 from all the y-coordinates,
so the effect would be to move it down 3. So,
you're actually moving it up by a certain amount.
Alright, so that's a proof of this claim, and
what it tells us is that all parabolas more or
less have the same shape. Well, in a sense,
the only real difference between the shape
of the graphs is going from here to here
in this rescaling. So, we're rescaling it,
making it wider or narrower, and perhaps
flipping it over. But then after that,
we're not really doing anything to
the shape—we're moving it around,
translating it, but not changing its shape. So,
all quadratic polynomials have graphs that are
readily identifiable. You know what a parabola
looks like. The story with cubics and quartics
and higher poly numbers is much different,
and that's going to be a very interesting
aspect—it's an interesting question in algebraic
geometry of what those things look like. But like
lines, which are pretty predictable, parabolas
are also very predictable, which is good.
So, to clarify those translates and scalings on
the last slide, let's have a look at an example.
So, here is the poly number that we've looked at
before: 5 - 3 alpha - 4 alpha squared. And here
I'm going through the process of completing the
square just so you can see how it looks again in
this specific case. First, I take the minus 4 out
as a common factor, so I get alpha squared + 3/4
alpha - 5/4, because I've taken a minus 4 out.
And then in here, I look at this term here and
divide it by 2 to get 3/8, and I square it and
add it, and to keep things the same, I also
have to subtract it as well. Then, these three
terms here together form (alpha + 3/8) squared,
and these two terms here—well, it would be x -
4, this thing here becomes just 5, and this one
here is 9/64. If we multiply that by 4, we get
9/16 with a plus sign because there's a minus
there and a minus there. So, when we simplify,
we get -4(alpha + 3/8) all squared + 89/16. Okay,
so how could we graph that from the point of
view of starting with your basic parabola alpha
squared? Now, here I've drawn a more standard kind
of diagram where I've actually plotted points. So,
this is the point (1, 1), point (2, 4), point (3,
9), minus 1, 1, minus 2, 4, minus 3, 9. There—our
standard parabola—a graph of it. Admittedly, not
a very refined graph, but a graph nevertheless.
Alright, let's do these various steps.
The first step is to multiply by -4. So,
what effect does that have? Well, each of these
points is multiplied by minus 4, and since that
the y-coordinate is multiplied by minus 4, instead
of plotting (1, 1), we're going to plot (1, -4),
and instead of plotting (2, 4), we're going to
plot (2, -16). And instead of plotting (3, 9),
we'd plot (3, -36), but that's off
our page, so we can't see it. So,
we just get these few points, and we connect them
up, and then that's our graph of -4 alpha squared.
The next thing we have to do is to take care
of this shift in here: we're replacing alpha
with alpha + 3/8. What does that do to this
thing? Well, it moves it over to the left—it's
a translate to the left. Okay, there's a plus
sign, so you might get confused and think about
it moving to the right—no, we're moving it
to the left. The graph here is to the left,
and it's now got its vertex at -3/8. In your mind,
you can check that because the value at -3/8,
namely here, is going to be zero, so it really
does go through that point there. And otherwise,
we just take all of these points and move
them over by -3/8 to get that one there.
And then the final stage is to add 89/16,
which is just a little bit more than 5. So,
we have to add a little more than 5 to each one of
these points, and we obtain this graph—that's our
graph of the original polynomial P illustrating
how it comes from alpha squared by a sequence of
transformations: scaling, then a horizontal
translation, then a vertical translation.
Now we're going to have a few
more slightly advanced theorems,
which are often not found in high school courses
or even in first-year or second-year courses at
uni or college. It's a bit of a shame because
these are natural, easy-to-prove consequences
of what we've already done, and I think they're
geometrically interesting facts about parabolas.
Alright, the first one is that if we
look at tangents to a general parabola
or general quadratic polynomial, and those
tangents are at r1 and r2, then the two
tangents will meet at a point, and here is
an explicit formula for where they meet. So,
we'll have a look at the formula, and then we'll
talk about some very interesting aspects of it.
Okay, so what we're claiming is that if we
look at the two tangent lines—the two tangent
lines to P at r1 and r2—so here they were.
These are the formulas that we had before,
with r1 for the first one and with r2 for the
second one—those are the two equations of the
lines. We have to find where they meet, so
we have to use the meet of lines theorem,
which is a formula that tells us if
we have equations for the two lines
or linear polynomial x, where that meet
is—this minus this over this minus this.
Alright, what is this minus this? Well, the
a's cancel, and we get cr2 squared minus cr1
squared. And what is this minus this? Well, now
the b's cancel, and we get 2cr2 minus 2cr1. And
the second term, the second coefficient,
is this thing times this one—there it is
there—minus this times this all over that same
denominator that we had before, this minus this.
Okay, so then what you do is you expand
these two terms out, and it turns out
that the numerators in both cases have a factor
of c(r2 - r1), which you can cancel. And this
thing here becomes (r1 + r2)/2. And then you
can check—some exercise—that when you do the
expansion and divide by the common factor,
you can get a + b(r1 + r2)/2 + cr1r2. Now,
the interesting point that answers an exercise
that I gave you in the last video: the last video,
I asked you to explain this phenomenon that
two tangents were meeting above their midpoint.
And here what we see is this a very general
phenomenon: that the x-coordinate of the meet
of these two tangents is always exactly halfway
between the two coordinates. No, it's the average.
And I should remark about this thing here—it's
also rather pleasant. It has the same form as
the original polynomial: a + b something + c
something else. And this is a linear thing,
and this is a quadratic thing, just like over
here. But here we've got the average of the
two r's, and here we have the product of the
two r's. So, in some sense, it's almost the
simplest kind of thing that you could cook
up with r1 and r2 sort of involved in here.
We're going to need one more result about
lines that we didn't talk about last time. So,
this is the theorem that tells us how to find the
equation of a line between two points in terms of
polynomials. So, if x1 and x2 are distinct, then
the line P equals a + b alpha—in other words,
the linear polynomial on which both (x1, y1) and
(x2, y2) lie—is given by these two equations. So,
this is the expression for a, and this is the
expression for b. And they have very similar
forms to the formula we were just using. The
formula for a is (x1y2 - x2y1)/(x1 - x2),
and b is (y1 - y2)/(x1 - x2). So,
I remind you that these two numbers
represent the y-intercept of the line
as well as the slope of the line. So,
this is a relatively familiar formula for the
slope of the line between two points; this is
perhaps a somewhat less familiar formula for
the y-intercept of the line between two points.
So, what's the proof? Well, we have to solve two
equations. We are trying to find a + b so that
this point and this point both lie on this
linear polynomial—in other words, y1 equals
a + bx1 and y2 equals a + bx2. We have to solve
these two linear equations for a and b. That's
about the level of the exercise. I'll leave you
to do that to find that those are the solutions.
So, we're going to apply that formula that
we've just proven to have a look at the standard
parabola, parabola P equals alpha squared, or
in x and y coordinates, y equals x squared. So,
there it is—I've drawn it a little bit freehand
this time. It goes to the point (1, 1),
through the point (2, 4)—it's a very beautiful
curve. And we've chosen two points on it,
a1 and a2, and the x-coordinate here is r1, and
the x-coordinate is r2. So, this point is the
point (r1, r1 squared), and this is the point (r2,
r2 squared). And I'm interested in two things:
I'm interested in the line that joins those
two points, and I'm also interested in the
two tangents to the parabola at those two points
and where they meet. So, we know where they meet
because we've just proven a theorem about that.
And I remind you that they meet at—first of all,
the x-coordinate is the average of r1 and
r2, and the y-coordinate here is obtained
from the poly number by taking a + b times this
plus c times the product of r1 and r2. Well,
this is a very simple form—it only
has the c term, and the c is 1,
so we're only getting r1r2 instead of those three
things added up. So, this is the formula for the
point where the two tangents to the curve
at a1 and a2 meet. And I remarked once again
that the x-coordinate here is exactly halfway
between r1 and r2, because it's the average.
Alright, what about the equation of this line?
Well, we've just proven a formula for that. So,
here are the two points. Then, let's say
we say that the line is s + t alpha. Then
the formula that we just wrote down
was that s is equal to—how do you
get that?—r1 times r2 squared minus r2
times r1 squared all over r1 - r2. So,
here there's a common factor of r1r2,
and the other factor is r2 - r1,
which cancels with r1 - r2, leaving a minus
sign. So, s is -r1r2. And what about t,
the slope? It's r1 squared minus r2 squared
divided by r1 - r2. Well, that factors immediately
as r1 + r2. And so there is the equation for
our line: -r1r2 + (r1 + r2) all times alpha.
Now, it's a very pleasant relationship—the
relationship between this line and this point. And
in more advanced mathematics—and we'll be talking
a little bit more about this—this is a very, very
important relationship that somehow characterizes
this conic. Okay, so if we move these two points
around, and of course this line will move around,
and this point here will also move around. And we
say that the relationship between this line L
and this point L is an example of polarity. So,
we sometimes say that this is the pole of this
line, and we sometimes say that this line is the
polar of this point. We'll talk a little bit more
about that in future videos—that's an important
concept, so you're seeing it here for the first
time in this simple case of this parabola.
There are a few more things to point out
here. One is that given this parabola, we can,
in some sense, find addition and multiplication
geometrically inside here. So, how is that? Well,
suppose that you have two points, r1 and r2,
on the line, and you wanted to add them. Well,
one way of getting that sum, r1 + r2, would be to
take r1 and r2, take the points on the parabola,
draw this line, and look at its slope. Right, we
know that r1 + r2 is the slope of this line. So,
the addition—it's maybe a curious way of
thinking about the addition—can be sort
of done geometrically if you can read off
the slope. What about the product? Well,
you can see a product here. Okay, if you wanted to
find what r1 times r2 was, one way of doing that
would be to say, alright, we could take r1, r2,
we can look at the two tangents, and we can see
where they meet. And then the y-coordinate of that
is going to be r1 times r2. Another way of finding
the product is to look at this equation here.
There's a product over floating around here. Now,
what is the significance of this quantity?
It's the y-intercept of this line. So,
here's a kind of a curious sort of slide rule—a
parabolic slide rule for multiplication. You want
to multiply r1 times r2? You just go up to the
parabola, you draw the line, you see where that
line meets the y-axis—that's, well, not exactly
the product; it's minus the product. So here,
in this case, the product of this one times
this one is pretty close to being minus two. So,
both addition and multiplication are somehow
encoded in the geometry of the parabola.
While we're thinking about these two things,
I'll give you some awesome exercises so you
can have some practice thinking about this lovely
geometry. So, the first exercise is very much in
line with what I've just been talking about. It's
another way of thinking about addition using the
geometry of this standard parabola. So, I want you
to show that if you're talking about the standard
parabola, P equals alpha squared—there
it is—and if you have two points on it,
just as before, a1 at a2, now up here with
coordinate r1 here and coordinate r2 here,
and let's just denote the vertex by O for
origin—that's got coordinates (0, 0)—then
if you do the following: if you take the line
through the origin, which is parallel to a1a2,
okay, that's the meaning of this—it's parallel to
here; it means it has the same slope—okay, then
you find out where it meets the parabola in the
second point. Then that x-coordinate there will be
r1 + r2. It's another way of geometrically adding
two numbers using the geometry of the parabola.
This second exercise is a very lovely and
important fact: that if A lies on the polar of B,
then B lies on the polar of A. Okay, so
here's a general parabola—it doesn't need
to be the standard parabola, this works for a
general parabola. So, you have a parabola here,
and you have a point A, and that point A has
a polar line—this one here. And I remind you,
what that means is that if you draw the
tangents to the parabola at the places
where the line meets it, you get two. So, that's
the polar of A. And there's another point B,
and here in green is its polar. So, if you
take the places where the green line meets
the parabola and draw the tangents, you get
two. Okay, the statement is that if A lies on
the polar of B—which in this case it does—then B
lies on the polar of A. This is a general fact—you
can prove it just for the standard parabola.
Those of you with a bit more algebraic skills,
try to see if you can do it for a
general parabola. Excellent exercise.
And the third exercise relates again a chord of
the parabola and the meet of the two tangents down
here. So, if this point here has x-coordinate
r1, and this point has x-coordinate r2,
then we know that where these two tangents meet,
that's going to have x-coordinate (r1 + r2)/2—the
average of r1 and r2, or the place halfway between
them. And now the exercise is to have a look at
the corresponding point on the parabola with the
same x-coordinate. So, you just go vertically up
or down until you hit the parabola—you get
a point. And the claim is that if you look
at the tangent line at that point, it's going
to be parallel to the line joining a1 and a2.
This is not necessarily horizontal, right? It
could be anywhere depending on the chord a1a2.
Alright, those are three excellent exercises
that will get you really appreciating the
geometry of the parabola, and I hope
starting to appreciate the fact that
we're doing mathematics and we're doing calculus,
and even though our origins were very elementary,
it seemed as if we did almost no work, and
suddenly calculus popped up in front of us.
This should be disorienting to mathematics
educators—if you're a mathematics educator
out there, have a think about this,
have a good long think about it.
Next time, we're going to go up a step
to talking about cubics. I'm going to
apply our reasoning about tangents and
derivatives to study cubic equations,
which are a fabulous world of all kinds
of interesting things about cubics. We're
going to make some contact with that. I'm
going to show you the prettiest theorem that
I know in calculus, and you will not have
seen it before, so it will be a real treat.
Alright, so next time,
the prettiest theorem in calculus and
cubics. I hope you'll join me for that.
I'm Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening.